# People v Williams
**2024 NY Slip Op 05818 [42 NY3d 1049]**  
**November 21, 2024**  

**Court of Appeals**  

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Brandon Williams, Appellant.

Argued October 16, 2024; decided November 21, 2024

[2]People v Williams, 204 AD3d 704, affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Twyla Carter, The Legal Aid Society, New York City (Steven R. Berko of
counsel), and Latham & Watkins LLP, New York City (Jonathan Lippman,
Richard D. Owens, Sara Gail Prudenti, Caroline C. Marshall, Alon
Handler, Juan M. Palacio Moreno and Lydia Franzek of counsel), for
appellant.

Melinda Katz, District Attorney, Kew Gardens (Christopher J.
Blira-Koessler and John M. Castellano of counsel), for respondent.

{**42 NY3d at 1049} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

Assuming, without deciding, that the introduction of codefendant's statement was a Bruton error (see Bruton v United States, 391 US 123 [1968]), any such error was harmless. The evidence of defendant's guilt, specifically the incriminating testimony of two acquaintances who were eyewitnesses to the{**42 NY3d at 1050} crime, was overwhelming and there is no reasonable possibility that the admission of codefendant's statement affected the verdict ([see People v Cedeno, 27 NY3d 110, 121-122 [2016]](https://miranda.jurisware.com/case/2016_02281/); [People v Hardy, 4 NY3d 192, 198 [2005]](https://miranda.jurisware.com/case/2005_01263/); People v Crimmins, 36 NY2d 230, 241 [1975]).

Chief Judge Wilson and Judges Rivera, Garcia, Singas, Cannataro, Troutman and Halligan concur.

Order affirmed, in a memorandum.

References
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2022/2022_02293.htm  
