# *People v Morgan*
**2025 NY Slip Op 05740**  
**October 16, 2025**  

**Court of Appeals**

This opinion is uncorrected and subject to revision before publication in the Official Reports.

Decided on October 16, 2025

No. 82

[*1]The People & c., Respondent, v Arthur H. Morgan Jr., Appellant.

Steven M. Sharp, for appellant.

Christopher Liberati-Conant, for respondent.

MEMORANDUM:

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

There is support in the record for the trial judge's determination that the prosecutor's race-neutral reasons for exercising the peremptory challenges at issue were not pretextual (see [*People v Wright*, 42 NY3d 708, 714-715 [2024]](/case/2024_03320)).

Defendant's challenge to the trial court's jury instruction on first-degree manslaughter as a lesser-included offense, his constitutional challenge to admission of prior testimony, and his arguments regarding the alleged use of propensity evidence in summation, as well as those concerning cross-examination of certain trial witnesses, are unpreserved. Defendant also failed to preserve his argument that his right to counsel was violated when he was interviewed by officers after a lawyer had purportedly communicated with the police for the purpose of representing him.

Defendant's remaining arguments are without merit.

Order affirmed, in a memorandum. Chief Judge Wilson and Judges Rivera, Garcia, Singas, Cannataro, Troutman and Halligan concur.

Decided October 16, 2025

References

1. https://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/ 2. https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2024/2024_03320.htm

