# People v Malloy
**2019 NY Slip Op 05061 [33 NY3d 1078]**  
**June 25, 2019**  

**Court of Appeals**  

As corrected through Wednesday, August 28, 2019

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Edward Malloy, Also Known as EB, Appellant.

Decided June 25, 2019

[2]People v Malloy, 166 AD3d 1302, affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Law Office of Paul J. Connolly, Delmar (Paul J. Connolly of counsel),
for appellant.

P. David Soares, District Attorney, Albany (Vincent Stark of counsel),
for respondent.

{**33 NY3d at 1079} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

[1] Defendant Edward Malloy asserts several meritless challenges to his conviction by jury verdict of second-degree murder (Penal Law ยง 125.25 [1]) and second-degree criminal possession of a weapon (Penal Law ยง 265.03 [3]). As relevant here, during jury selection, defense counsel objected to the prosecutor's peremptory strike of an African American prospective juror as racially motivated, in violation of Batson v Kentucky (476 US 79 [1986]). The prosecutor responded that the prospective juror was "[d]ismissive and rude," and Supreme Court accepted the prosecutor's race-neutral explanation after thorough questioning. We accord "great deference on appeal" to a trial judge's resolution of a Batson challenge, including a determination regarding discriminatory motive (Hernandez v New York, 500 US 352, 364 [1991]; [3]see also People v Hecker, 15 NY3d 625, 656 [2010]). Here, the court's credibility determination is supported by the record and we cannot say as a matter of law that the proffered reason was "pretext for racial discrimination" (Hernandez, 500 US at 363).{**33 NY3d at 1080}

[2] We also reject defendant's argument that Supreme Court unlawfully imposed consecutive sentences for the criminal weapon possession and murder counts. "So long as a defendant knowingly unlawfully possesses a loaded firearm before forming the intent to cause a crime with that weapon, the possessory crime has already been [*2]completed, and consecutive sentencing is permissible" ([4]People v Brown, 21 NY3d 739, 751 [2013]). Here, the record supports Supreme Court's imposition of consecutive sentences. Video surveillance evidence showed defendant in possession of the gun several minutes before approaching the victim, supporting the conclusion that defendant possessed the weapon for a sufficient period of time before forming the specific intent to kill. Thus, consecutive sentencing was permissible.

Defendant's challenges to the grand jury proceedings and sufficiency of the evidence lack merit. His pro se claims are either unpreserved or similarly meritless.

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Stein, Fahey, Garcia, Wilson and Feinman concur.

On review of the submissions pursuant to section 500.11 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.11), order affirmed, in a memorandum.

References

[1] http://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/  
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2018/2018_07977.htm  
[3] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2010/2010_08766.htm  
[4] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2013/2013_07514.htm  
