# People v Rkein
**2019 NY Slip Op 03528 [33 NY3d 1001]**  
**May 7, 2019**  

**Court of Appeals**  

As corrected through Wednesday, July 3, 2019

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Hassan Rkein, Appellant.

Argued March 27, 2019; decided May 7, 2019

[2]People v Rkein, 152 AD3d 434, affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Christina A. Swarns, Office of the Appellate Defender, New York City
(Mandy E. Jaramillo and Eunice C. Lee of counsel), for appellant.

Cyrus R. Vance, Jr., District Attorney, New York City (Jared Wolkowitz
and Karen Schlossberg of counsel), for respondent.

{**33 NY3d at 43} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed. Defendant's request for a justification instruction with respect to the second-degree assault charge was properly denied. On this record, the trial court appropriately determined that, if the jury convicted defendant of second-degree assault by means of a dangerous instrument (Penal Law § 120.05 [2]), it necessarily determined that defendant employed deadly, rather than ordinary, physical force by striking the complainant on the head with a pint glass (see People v Vega, 33 NY3d 1002 [2019] [decided today]). The trial court also properly determined that no reasonable view of the evidence supported a deadly force justification charge. The evidence at trial—including video surveillance of the altercation—shows that, at the time defendant employed deadly physical force, the complainant had merely pushed defendant, albeit with "pretty strong force," and then rested his hands at his sides while a female patron attempted to separate the two men. Because defendant could not have reasonably believed that the complainant was using or about to use deadly physical force (Penal Law § 35.15 [2]; Matter of Y.K., 87 NY2d 430, 433-434 [1996]), he was not entitled to a deadly force justification charge.

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Stein, Fahey, Garcia, Wilson and Feinman concur.

Order affirmed, in a memorandum. [*2]

References
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2017/2017_05678.htm  
