# People v Campbell
**2011 NY Slip Op 01047 [16 NY3d 756]**  
**February 15, 2011**  

**Court of Appeals**  

As corrected through Wednesday, April 6, 2011

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
William Campbell, Appellant.

Argued January 6, 2011; decided February 15, 2011

[2]People v Campbell, 66 AD3d 590, affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP, New York City (Katharine M. Atlas of
counsel), and Office of the Appellate Defender (Daniel Warshawsky and
Richard M. Greenberg of counsel) for appellant.

Cyrus R. Vance, Jr., District Attorney, New York City (Ellen Stanfield
Friedman and Richard Nahas of counsel), for respondent.

{**16 NY3d at 757} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

Defendant William Campbell was arrested on July 30, 2007 and charged with criminal sale of a controlled substance in the third degree (Penal Law ยง 220.39 [1]) after having allegedly approached an undercover police officer to initiate a drug transaction. The parties [*2]stipulated that the courtroom should be closed to the general public during the undercover's testimony. The prosecutor, however, also sought to exclude defendant's family members planning to attend the trial. Following a Hinton hearing (People v Hinton, 31 NY2d 71 [1972], cert denied 410 US 911 [1973]), the trial judge ruled that defendant's grandmother, with whom he resided and who had apparently reared him, and an aunt could remain in the courtroom when the undercover testified; he excluded another aunt and one of her sons on the ground that they resided near enough to the area where the undercover officer conducted ongoing drug investigations to present a risk of exposure, compromising his effectiveness and safety. We conclude that the record made at the Hinton hearing was adequate to support the trial judge's exercise of discretion to exclude the aunt and her son (People v Nieves, 90 NY2d 426 [1997]).

Defendant's remaining contentions likewise lack merit.

Chief Judge Lippman and Judges Ciparick, Graffeo, Read, Smith, Pigott and Jones concur.

Order affirmed in a memorandum.

References

[1] http://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2009/2009_07740.htm
