# People v Smalling
**2017 NY Slip Op 03442 [29 NY3d 981]**  
**May 2, 2017**  

**Court of Appeals**  

As corrected through Wednesday, June 14, 2017

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Omar A. Smalling, Appellant.

Argued March 23, 2017; decided May 2, 2017

[2]People v Smalling, 126 AD3d 820, reversed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Lynn W.L. Fahey, Appellate Advocates, New York City (Jenin Younes of
counsel), for appellant.

Richard A. Brown, District Attorney, Kew Gardens (Jill A. Gross-Marks,
Robert J. Masters and John M. Castellano of counsel), for respondent.

{**29 NY3d at 982} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be reversed and a new trial ordered.

Although we reject defendant's contention that the evidence presented at trial did not support a charge of constructive possession, we nevertheless conclude that defendant is entitled to a new trial. The trial court erred in that it agreed to the People's request at the charge [*2]conference not to charge the jury on constructive possession, but then ultimately provided a constructive possession charge to the jury, resulting in prejudice to defendant (see CPL 300.10 [4]; People v Greene, 75 NY2d 875, 876-877 [1990]). Under the unique circumstances of this case, the error is not harmless ([3]cf. People v Nevins, 16 AD3d 1046, 1047 [4th Dept 2005], lv denied 4 NY3d 889 [2005], cert denied 548 US 911 [2006]).

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Stein, Fahey, Garcia and Wilson concur.

Order reversed and a new trial ordered, in a memorandum.

References
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2015/2015_01973.htm  
[3] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2005/2005_02021.htm  
