# People v Baisley
**2018 NY Slip Op 07039 [32 NY3d 1020]**  
**October 23, 2018**  

**Court of Appeals**  

Published by [1]New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law ยง 431.

As corrected through Wednesday, December 5, 2018

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Steven Baisley, Appellant.

Argued September 13, 2018; decided October 23, 2018

[2]People v Baisley, 55 Misc 3d 148(A), 2017 NY Slip Op 50709(U),
affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Richard L. Herzfeld, P.C., New York City (Richard L. Herzfeld of
counsel), for appellant.

David M. Hoovler, District Attorney, Goshen (Andrew R. Kass of
counsel), for respondent.

{**32 NY3d at 1020} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Term should be affirmed.

Defendant's challenge to the authority of Justice Court over criminal charges arising from his noncompliance with a child support order is not properly before this Court. Contrary to the parties' mistaken representation below, the underlying support order was not issued by Family Court but by Supreme Court in the context of defendant's contested matrimonial proceeding.{**32 NY3d at 1021} As defendant concedes, Supreme Court has constitutional authority to issue such an order (see NY Const, art VI, ยง 7; Family Ct Act ยง 114; see generally Merril Sobie, Practice Commentaries, McKinney's Cons Laws of NY, Family Ct Act ยง 411 ["Family Court is . . . powerless to determine those issues which comprise a (pending) matrimonial action, including child support, unless the matter is specifically referenced to the Family Court by the Supreme Court"]). As a consequence, we have no occasion to opine on defendant's claim that, pursuant to the Family Court Act, Family Court has exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over any criminal charges based on violations of its own support order.

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Stein, Fahey, Garcia, Wilson and Feinman concur.

Order affirmed, in a memorandum.

References

1. http://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/
2. https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2017/2017_50709.htm
