# People v Jordan
**2016 NY Slip Op 02284 [27 NY3d 979]**  
**March 29, 2016**  

**Court of Appeals**  

Published by [1]New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law ยง 431.

As corrected through Wednesday, June 1, 2016

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Ronnell Jordan, Appellant.

Decided March 29, 2016

[2]People v Jordan, 125 AD3d 787, affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

White & Case LLP, New York City (Kevin C. Adam, James Trainor and Louis
O'Neill of counsel), and Lynn W.L. Fahey, Appellate Advocates, New York
City, for appellant.

Kenneth P. Thompson, District Attorney, Brooklyn (Amy Appelbaum of
counsel), for respondent.

{**27 NY3d at 979} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

Defendant failed to preserve his contention that the trial court discharged prospective jurors based on hardship without conducting a sufficient inquiry (see People v King, 27 NY3d 147 [2016] [decided herewith]). [*2]Defendant's remaining contentions are without merit.

Rivera, J. (dissenting).

For the reasons stated in my dissenting opinion in People v King (27 NY3d 147 [2016] [decided herewith]), I would reverse the order of the Appellate Division{**27 NY3d at 980} on the sole ground that the judge's jury selection process denied defendant his right to a jury trial.

Judges Pigott, Abdus-Salaam, Stein and Fahey concur; Judge Rivera dissents in an opinion; Chief Judge DiFiore and Judge Garcia taking no part.

On review of submissions pursuant to section 500.11 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.11), order affirmed, in a memorandum.

References

1. http://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/
2. https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2015/2015_01288.htm
