# People v Ramlall
**2020 NY Slip Op 00995 [34 NY3d 1154]**  
**February 13, 2020**  

**Court of Appeals**  

Published by [1]New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law ยง 431.

As corrected through Wednesday, April 22, 2020

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Ganesh Ramlall, Appellant.

Argued January 9, 2020; decided February 13, 2020

[2]People v Ramlall, 59 Misc 3d 134(A), 2018 NY Slip Op 50491(U),
affirmed.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Janet E. Sabel, The Legal Aid Society, New York City (Natalie Rea of
counsel), for appellant.

Eric Gonzalez, District Attorney, Brooklyn (Ann Bordley, Leonard
Joblove and Victor Barall of counsel), for respondent.

{**34 NY3d at 1154} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Term, insofar as appealed from, should be affirmed.

Defendant argues that the lengthy delay of his prosecution for the traffic infraction of driving while ability impaired (Vehicle and Traffic Law ยง 1192 [1]) violated his constitutional right to a speedy trial (see People v Taranovich, 37 NY2d 442 [1975]; CPL 30.20). Though a close case, we conclude that, after balancing the relevant factors, defendant's claims do not rise to the level of a constitutional violation.

The People's argument that the constitutional right to a speedy trial does not apply to traffic infractions is unpreserved for our review.

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Stein, Fahey, Garcia, Wilson and Feinman concur.

Order, insofar as appealed from, affirmed, in a memorandum.

References

1. http://www.courts.state.ny.us/reporter/
2. https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2018/2018_50491.htm
