# People v Carmona
**2021 NY Slip Op 05390 [37 NY3d 1016]**  
**October 7, 2021**  

**Court of Appeals**  

As corrected through Wednesday, November 3, 2021

[*1]

The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v
Vincent Carmona, Appellant.

Decided October 7, 2021

[2]People v Carmona, 185 AD3d 600, modified.

APPEARANCES OF COUNSEL

Jonathan Rosenberg, PLLC, Brooklyn (Jonathan Rosenberg of counsel), for
appellant.

Eric Gonzalez, District Attorney, Brooklyn (Solomon Neubort of
counsel), for respondent.

{**37 NY3d at 1017} OPINION OF THE COURT

Memorandum.

The order of the Appellate Division should be modified by remitting to Supreme Court for further proceedings in accordance with this memorandum and, as so modified, affirmed.

Supreme Court erred in denying defendant's pretrial request for a hearing pursuant to People v Rodriguez (79 NY2d 445 [1992]), as the prosecutor here offered only bare assurances that the witness was familiar with defendant. Further, the Appellate Division erroneously relied on testimony adduced at trial to overcome the suppression court's error.

"Thus, the case should be remitted to Supreme Court for a hearing to determine whether the [photographic] identification procedure was confirmatory. If, after that hearing, the court concludes that the People have not sustained their burden, a Wade hearing should be held and further proceedings, including a new trial, should be had as the circumstances may warrant. If the court concludes{**37 NY3d at 1018} that a Wade hearing is not required, the judgment[ ] should be amended to reflect that result" (see Rodriguez, 79 NY2d at 453).

Defendant's challenge to the weight of the evidence is unreviewable, and his remaining contention is unpreserved.

Chief Judge DiFiore and Judges Rivera, Fahey, Garcia, Wilson, Singas and Cannataro concur.

On review of submissions pursuant to section 500.11 of the Rules of the Court of Appeals (22 NYCRR 500.11), order modified by remitting the case to Supreme Court, Kings County, for further proceedings in accordance with the memorandum herein and, as so modified, affirmed.

References
[2] https://www.nycourts.gov/reporter/3dseries/2020/2020_03672.htm  
